[AUDIO LOGO]
>> Friday the 13th, how is
it connected with the Knights
Templar?
I'm Timothy Hogan, Grandmaster
of the Knights Templar.
>> And I'm Scott Wolter,
forensic geologist
and a Knights Templar.
And this is Mysteries
of the Knights Templar.
[THEME MUSIC]
>> So everyone has heard about
bad luck being associated with
Friday the 13th, but very
few people realize that
it's directly connected
to the Knights Templar.
The question is,
how is it connected?
>> Well, we need to realize that
the Templar Order while they
grew in fame and fortune and
influence throughout Europe,
there came a point where there
were other powers that became
jealous of the
influence that they had.
On the one hand, you
had the Roman Church
who was getting very
uncomfortable with the Templar
association with groups
outside of the Roman influence.
And then on the other hand,
you had King Philip the Fair,
who was looking
to start new wars
and needing money to do it.
In fact, he had owed the
Templar Order lots of money
that he had borrowed previously.
And he wanted to set himself
up as the new war king.
And in order to do that,
he needed to get money.
He knew that the Templars had a
rich depository in their Paris
commandery.
He owed them money
and he figured why not
kill two birds with one stone--
>> Or best way to get rid
of the debt is to get rid
of the debtor, right?
>> That's exactly right.
So he could take
care of his debt
while getting more money for
his wars, and as a result,
he decided he needed to
stage a coup, if you will,
or an overthrow of
the Templar Order.
In September, he signed arrest
warrants for all Templars
in France, which was to go
into effect a month later.
And ultimately on
Friday, October 13th,
the Templar Order was
rounded up in what
was hoped to be a surprise
suppression by Philip the Fair.
>> But it wasn't a surprise.
>> It wasn't a surprise.
de Molay had already knew that
this was going to be happening.
The Templar Order, trying
to figure out what to do,
decided that they could actually
send most of their Knights
outside of Paris with the
treasures and everything
else that was being held
at the Paris commandery.
Get them out of France, and
leave a few Templars behind
to be rounded up.
And of course, de
Molay, Jacques de Molay,
the Grandmaster of the
Templars at the time,
wasn't going to sacrifice
other people to this
without he himself also being
willing to be sacrificed.
He thought, I'm sure that
he could talk his way out
of this situation.
I mean, he had had a long
history with Philip the Fair
and he thought he
could get out of it.
Well, as it turns out
he didn't get out of it.
They ended up getting rounded
up, tortured for seven years.
And by March of 1314,
Jacques de Molay
as Grandmaster, Geoffroi de
Charney, the Norman preceptor,
were burnt at the stake in front
of Notre Dame Cathedral, one
of their great creations
of the Templar Order.
This really sealed
the idea that Friday
the 13th, which was when the
date they were rounded up,
became an unlucky day.
>> And from then on, it
was demonized, right?
>> Right.
Now, we run into
this situation where
most people think that this was
the end of the Templar Order.
In fact, many historians
will try to play it out
like with the dying breath
of Jacques de Molay,
the Templar Order was finished.
In reality--
>> You and I both
know different.
>> We both know different.
At this point, the Templar
Order had to go underground.
>> Right.
So where did they go?
I mean, this is one of
the burning questions
that historians have asked.
OK, Scott, you and
Tim are telling us
that the Templar survived.
Where did they go?
OK.
>> Well, they went
several places.
I mean, first of all,
we have to remember
they had established an entire
Templar nation in Portugal.
So in Portugal, they
weren't even rounded up.
They just changed their names
to the Knights of Christ.
Very easy solution,
everything was OK.
>> It was to appease the
Pope at the time, right?
>> That's exactly right.
>> And what I've read
is that at the time,
the Templars had basically been
hired to defend them from being
attacked by the
Moors from the South.
And basically the
King of Portugal said,
wait, what do you mean?
I'm going to get rid
of my fighting force?
No, I'm not.
>> Right.
>> But you know what?
I'll throw you a bone.
We'll change the name.
>> Right.
That's exactly right.
We had some Templars we just
went back to the Holy Land
and converted to Islam.
I mean, they had already
established relationships
with Islamic families,
also Druze families,
Sabian families.
So they just went back
to the Middle East.
>> And the spiritual pursuit
of the Christos didn't matter
if it was Christianity
or the Muslim faith.
They could still do what they
had done all along, right?
>> That's exactly right.
Now, some Templars
found it most convenient
to just absorb themselves
into their orders.
I mean, one of the things
that happened when the Templar
order was suppressed is
most of their properties
had been reconfiscated
by the Roman Church
and then distributed to
the Knights Hospitaller who
was a rival order at the time.
The Knights Hospitaller
later became
known as the Knights of Malta.
So many Templars just went
into the Knights Hospitaller
and tried to maintain business
as usual if they were able to.
Still, others we're
told, at least
according to our tradition,
fled up to Scotland
because Robert the
Bruce at the time
had already been
excommunicated by the church.
>> Not long before that.
>> Not long before that because
he was having problems with
them.
And so he was trying to set
up his own Scottish state.
And who better to help him
with this but the Templars.
And the legend says that
Templars went up, fought
at the Battle of Bannockburn
and helped the Scots win
the day for independence.
>> Well, not only is that part
of the legend but we actually
have documents that
speak exactly to that,
that the Templars did
serve at Bannockburn.
And because of that,
King Robert the Bruce
and the Scottish
earls were obligated
to protect the surviving
Templars and the treasures
that they brought to Scotland.
Another interesting
fun fact when
we're talking about
Scotland is let's
go back to Hugues de Payens
when the order was first founded
and the year was 1129 when
the order became official.
We know that they certainly
were founded before that.
But in 1129, the
Grandmaster Hugues de Paynes
went to the British
Isles and met
with leaders in
England and Scotland,
and planted the seeds for what
would eventually germinate
almost 200 years later.
When the Templars
did go to Scotland,
Robert the Bruce certainly
had memory of that
and it worked out for them.
And it worked out for the
Scots because the Battle
of Bannockburn was
the single greatest
day in the history of Scotland
which is still celebrated
like our Independence Day--
>> Independence Day.
>> --right?
It's the same thing.
>> That's right.
Now, some Templars
also fled to the area
of what is now Switzerland.
Was said to have helped
fight a peasant's revolt
there to establish
independence in that area.
We know that some Templars
went into the area of now
Germany, the Württemberg area.
And in fact, they just
eventually recalled
themselves the Militia
Crucifera Evangelica,
which was this underground
body that ended up
becoming very instrumental in
Protestant revolt happening
in Germany at the time in
the Black Forest of Tübingen
and in other areas like that.
By 1598, 1599, they were
very well-established.
Frederick, the Duke
of Württemberg,
was the Grandmaster of the
order there in Germany and--
>> Martin Luther played
a role in that, too.
>> Martin Luther was protected
by families in that tradition.
And even Queen Elizabeth I was
also a member of the Militia
Crucifera Evangelica.
So this Templar strain had
fingers going out everywhere.
>> All over.
>> But one of the places where
it became the most fertile
survival, the Templars had built
all of these cathedrals and all
of these structures
across Europe,
over 1,000 different
structures in 200 years.
And most people think of
the Templars as Knights
but they also had sea
captains, they had clerics,
they had farmers, and
they had stonemasons.
So it was very easy for them
to switch over into stonemason
guilds in order to survive.
They already had the
ability as a stonemason
to travel from one
place to another
and so they just took on a
new identity in that regard.
And we know this
because, for example,
the cathedral builders are
known as the "compagnons"
within the French tradition, and
they're composed of two guilds.
They're known as the
"children of Solomon"
and the "children of
the master Jacques."
Well, the children
of Solomon say
they got their name from
the Poor Knights of Christ
of the Temple of Solomon,
which was the Knights Templars.
>> Right.
>> And the children of the
master Jacques said they got
their name from the
master Jacques de Molay,
the Grandmaster of
the Knights Templar.
So both of these guilds that
are responsible for building
the cathedrals have
a common origin.
They say they trace
their origins back
to the Knights Templar.
>> So it sounds to me like this
whole notion that the Templars
disappeared into history, they
grew old and died and that was
the end of it, is
anything but that.
In fact, it is the opposite.
And what I find the
most interesting
is in the last 20
years or so, there
has been so much new information
that has come forward
that has shed light on the
darkness of this whole question
of what happened to the Templars
after the suppression on Friday
the 13th, 1307.
>> Well, and we have to
remember the night before
the suppression as well, there
was an entire fleet of Templar
ships that disappeared.
>> From the Port of La Rochelle
on the Western Coast of France,
and disappeared
into history, right?
>> Right.
>> Not hardly.
>> So where did they go?
And who did they become?
So the Templars started
going to all these places.
We know they went into London
in places like Royston Cave,
but they also hung out in
different places in Scotland.
And do you want to
talk about that more?
I mean, other than just the
battle with Robert the Bruce,
I mean, there was
more going on there.
Let's talk about what
the documents say.
>> OK, well, yes, we do have
some pretty important documents
the Cremona document.
We also have what we call
the Sinclair/Weems journals.
But within the Cremona
Document, we actually
have a message
that was encrypted
that we were able to decode
that talks about the order being
made by Jacques de
Molay of preparing
to get the treasures out.
We've talked a lot about
where the Templars went
but we didn't talk about
where the treasures went.
And we know the treasures
were sent North because we
have a document that says so.
And the order was
actually given by de Molay
according to this
message in 1304.
So this is consistent
with the thesis
that you and I have
had for a long time,
that the long range goal was the
new Atlantis in North America.
So they set the table early on.
But what the document says
is that three ships carrying
gold, silver,
jewels, and something
called the relic was taken.
And the first stop when
they left La Rochelle
was the Isle of Man.
And these three ships stopped
at three different ports
which of course, is brilliant.
You're not going to put
all your eggs in one basket
if there are French
ships waiting for you,
you're screwed.
We don't know how long they were
but the message says they then
went to the West Isle
in Northern Scotland.
Well, along the way, is a
place called the Isle of Arran.
And on the Isle of Arran is
a place called King's Caves.
And these caves are massive.
I visited them myself.
And what was very
interesting is that there
are carvings on the inside
of interesting depictions.
There's one with two
hands going up in the air
that we think is connected
with the symbol of Virgo.
And if you look at the
constellation of Virgo,
it looks like a goddess with
their hands up like this.
And the fish, the Christian
fish, the Vesica Pisces
is carved in the cave,
there's a Christian cross
that on the lower part has
ovaries on the lower side.
I mean, these are
esoteric symbols.
What are they doing there.
Well, it seems to me this would
have been the perfect hiding
place to put those treasures
for at least a short time.
And directly across the bay
to the North on the Peninsula
from the Isle of
Arran, and you can
see when you look
out King's Cave
is a Cistercian Abbey called
Saddle Abbey that today
is in ruins.
But there is a shelter
that Scotland heritage,
the government has built and
they have about a dozen Templar
grave slabs that are preserved.
So what it looks like is
when the Templars left
the Isle of Man, they came
and brought the treasures
to King's Cave.
And the Knights
stayed at an Abbey.
I mean, they got a
hotel right there.
>> Who they're already
associated with.
And so the other thing
that really to me
is a piece of evidence that
really helps support this idea,
is that in the interpretive
materials at King's cave,
it says that King
Robert the Bruce
visited King's Caves three
months before October 13
in 1307.
What is he doing
visiting these caves?
I think he was setting the
table for what he already
knew was going to happen.
>> Yeah, for sure.
For sure.
And what better allies
than the Templar Order
who was used to severe--
>> A fighting force, a
trained fighting force.
>> That's right.
Yeah.
But this was only the beginning
of the trail of the treasures.
They kept going West
and eventually they
made it far to the West.
>> Well, that was
always the goal, right?
>> That was the goal all along.
>> --to establish
the new Jerusalem,
the new Atlantis and the
Americas and they had already
established those connections
with the tribes in order to do
it.
>> And they also called it
the "Free Templar State,"
which I love.
>> Yeah, I agree.
So really, what
we're saying here
is this was not the end
of the Templar order.
It was just the end
of the Roman Catholic
patronage of the Templar order.
And that the Templar
order continued
to exist while crippled from
this horrible suppression,
they already had
everything in place
to establish this new land,
this new Atlantis to the West.
And they just, were going to
move forward from this point
on without the Roman
Catholic patronage.
>> I guess the way we could
sum up Friday the 13th
and the suppression of
the Templars is that it
wasn't the end.
It was just the
end of that chapter
and it was the new beginning
of the next chapter.
>> Yeah, they rose strongly
like a phoenix in the--
>> From the ashes.
>> From the ashes
of de Molay, yeah.
>> Thank you for joining us
on this episode of Mysteries
of the Knights Templar.
[THEME MUSIC]